---
title: 0. Considering A Object-Oriented Approach
created: 03, Jan, 2025
modified:
  - 05, Jan, 2025
  - 03, Jan, 2025
---
Sooner or later, in programming, you'll get to the point where you're trying to keep so much information linked together about a specific instance that it becomes difficult to keep it all in sync. Dictionaries can help with that, and the current implementation of the forecast being a dictionary of dictionaries works - but there will inevitably be a breaking point:

- Either the mental model to keep track of where you are becomes too cumbersome
- or you need to start adding functionality alongside the data

In this case, neither might be true for you, but I think this is a great example of when introducing an object to hold the relevant information is helpful (and more importantly, not as contrived as some examples you'll see out on the wider web).

---

One of the ways we might want to restructure the data is to group the information from the extended forecast with the hourly.

```
Extend Forecast
	- has a detailed summary for a 12 hour period
	- high and low temperature ranges

Hourly Forecast
	- Projected temperature
	- Chance of Rain
	- Wind speed (which we can use to calculate windchill)
	- etc
```

Which we might want to combine to be something like:

```
YYYY-MM-DD's Forecast
	- summary of what the day is going to look like
	- summary of what the night is going to look like
	- the High and Low
	- Breakdown by hour
		- temperature (+ windchill)
		- Chance of Rain
		- Wind speed
```

And then we could access the information with the benefit of intellisense and preformatting the values in a desired format. Loosely translating this into a dictionary first would look something like:

```py
todays_forecast = {
	day_summary : "Text about how the daytime is going to look.",
	night_summary : "Text about how the evening is going to look.",
	temperature_high : 60,
	temperature_low : 30,
	hourly_breakdown : {
		"06" : {
			"temperature" : 45,
			"windchill" : 40,
			"chance_of_rain" : 30,
			"wind_speed": 6
		},
		# etc
	}
}
```

Or, with grouping more of the information together:

```py
todays_forecast = {
	summary : {
		day : "Text about how the daytime is going to look.",
		night : "Text about how the evening is going to look.",
	},
	temperature_range : {
		high : 60,
		low : 30
	},
	hourly_breakdown : {
		"06" : {
			"temperature" : 45,
			"windchill" : 40,
			"chance_of_rain" : 30,
			"wind_speed": 6
		},
		# etc
	}
}
```

While this does group the information from both forecasts together, the way we access it hasn't really changed: we end up needing to do chained dictionary key-value calls:

```py
print("Today's forecast:")
print(todays_forecast["summary"]["day"])
print(f"Hi: {todays_forecast["temperature_range"]["hi"]} Low: {todays_forecast["temperature_range"]["low"]}")

for hour, hourly_data in todays_forecast["hourly_breakdown"].items():
	if int(hour) < 18:
		print(f"{hour}: {hourly_data["temperature"]} (Feels like: {hourly_data["windchill"]}) with a {hourly_data["chance_of_rain"]}% chance of rain and {hourly_data["wind_speed"]} mph winds.")

print("---")
# and then repeat for the evening
```

There's no explicit right or wrong way to do this, but the above implementation is very prone to errors in mistyping the key name or forgetting exactly how it's structured.

>[!example] 
>Take a good look at the implementation and then hide the window and see if you can remember how to access the temperature for 6 am by writing out.
>
>Did you remember all the keys you needed?
> > [!example]- Answer
> > 
> > `todays_forecast["hourly_breakdown"]["06"]["temperature"]`

So, what if we take our daily forecast structure and make a class out of it?

> One way you can think about what a `class` is: It is a concrete contract stating that all instances of it will contain specific properties (read: values/variables) and functionality.

```py
class DailyForecast(): # This tells python we are defining what the class is going to look like
	def __init__(self): # This function is called when we create a new instance of the class like: todays_forecast = DailyForecast().
		self.day_summary = ""
		self.night_summary = ""
		self.temperature_high = 0
		self.tempearture_low = 0
		self.hourly_breakdown = { }
```

What this does is state that each `instance` of `DailyForecast` is going to have the following properties on it:

- `day_summary`
- `night_summary`
- `temperature_high`
- `temperature_low`
- and a dictionary called `hourly_breakdown`

Before we worry about assigning values to these, this means we can start to restructure our code a bit:

```py
todays_forecast = DailyForecast()

print("Today's forecast:")
print(todays_forecast.day_summary)
print(f"Hi: {todays_forecast.temperature_high} Low: {todays_forecast.temperature_low}")
```

Now lets tackle initializing the `DailyForecast` with some data. When we create the new instance, we, in practice, already have the data accessible in the `extended_forecast` and `hourly_forecast` dictionaries, so it makes logical sense to initialize the new instance of `DailyForecast` with this information.

There are a few approaches to this:

- pass along the information using *positional arguments*
- pass along the information using *keyword arguments*
- pass along the dictionaries along with the date for the forecast and handle pulling the information out inside `__init__()`


Alternatively, we could create a function inside `DailyForecast` called something like `build()` that would be responsible for updating the values from their defaults to the corresponding data. This approach is more typically done when you don't have access to the data when you are creating the new instance.

Since we have the data, I'll opt for the three approaches above.
