---
title: 3. Building a Points Request using the `requests` library
created: 03, Jan, 2025
modified:
  - 03, Jan, 2025
---

## Summary

Now that you have the context of what we are working with, we can get started with the actual programming side of things. Just to recap, the general flow for what we are going to do is:

1. We ask Weather.gov for grid information given our latitude and longitude
2. Weather.gov responds with our requested information.
3. We then ask Weather.gov for the forecast (or hourly forecast) for the corresponding grid location
4. Weather.gov responds again with our request information
5. We format this information to be displayed how we want

# Step 1: Request Points

At this point, your notebook file should be similar to the following:

```py
from dataclasses import dataclass
from datetime import datetime
import math
import pytz
import time

import requests

#Optional:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np
```

Go ahead and add a new code cell below the imports and we will start with formatting a points request.

```py
latitude = 45.5958
longitude = -122.6092

points_url = f"https://api.weather.gov/points/{latitude},{longitude}"
```

Here, we just added some variables to hold the latitude and longitude for the location in general and created a formatted string with the points request url. This is initially set up so you could have a list of latitudes and longitudes that you iterate over and make the subsequent requests for. For our purposes, its a bit overkill, but I think it makes it a bit more clear what are the values you want to change to suit your needs are.

Next up, we actually do the request, and this is where the `requests` library really makes things nice. All you need to do is add the following line:

```py
response = requests.get(url=points_url)
```

In short, the `requests.get()` call is creating an http get request, formatting it appropriately and sending it off to the given url. Internally, the function is handling all the handshaking for us and in return, gives us what the API responds with.

# Step 2: 

Now, assuming we didn't mess up our latitude or longitude, or somehow otherwise malform the url, `response` is going to be populated with a bunch of information.

The first thing we might want to do before trying to access a whole bunch of properties is check to see if the request was successful. The `status_code` property does just that and we can check to make sure everything is okay by either printing 

```py
print(response.status_code) #200 means everything worked
```

or proceeding to handle different values:

```py
if response.status_code == 404:
    print("Something went wrong with requesting data. Please verify the latitude and longitude are correct before retrying.")
    print(f'\tService Error Message:\n\t\t{response.json()["detail"]}')
```

Most of the time, if the error is a common one, the `.json` returned from the API will be in the `"detail"` key.  Now, if everything worked out, we can check for `response.status_code == 200` and then access the grid information. If you recall from the [[2. Getting a result using your browser#Response from the API]] section, what we want is located under the `"properties"` key:

```json
{
	"@context" : [ "..."],
	"id" : "...",
	"type" : "Feature",
	"geometry" : { "..." },
	"properties" : {
		"@id" : "...",
		"@type" : "wx:Point",
		"cwa": "<Forecast Office Name>",
		"forecastOffice" : "<Forecast Office Name>",
		"gridId": "<Grid ID>",
		"gridX": 000,
		"gridY": 000,
		...
	}
}
```

So next, we just create three variables, `gridX`, `gridY`, `gridId` to capture this information and access it by calling `response.json()`.

```py
points_data = response.json()
```

The `.json()` call returns a dictionary of the information received from the API, organized in the format we saw in the browser. So, accessing what we want is as simple as specifying that we want to first look under the `"properties"` key, and then `"gridX"`, `"gridY"`, and `"gridId"`:

```py
gridX = points_data["properties"]["gridX"]
gridY = points_data["properties"]["gridY"]
gridId = points_data["properties"]["gridId"]
```

Alternatively, if you didn't want to chain the dictionary calls, you could split it up into an additional step by:

```py
points_properties = points_data["properties"]

gridX = points_properties["gridX"]
# etc ...
```

Both are equivalent in terms of getting the results, but depending on your familiarity or ability to mentally map a dictionary of dictionaries, you might prefer the additional step. 

# Wrap Up

To recap, at this point, your notebook should look similar to the following:

Cell 1:
```py
from dataclasses import dataclass
from datetime import datetime
import math
import pytz
import time

import requests

#Optional:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np
```

Cell 2:
```py
latitude = 45.5958
longitude = -122.6092

points_url = f"https://api.weather.gov/points/{latitude},{longitude}"

response = requests.get(url=points_url)

print(response.status_code) #200 means everything worked

if response.status_code == 404:
    print("Something went wrong with requesting data. Please verify the latitude and longitude are correct before retrying.")
    print(f'\tService Error Message:\n\t\t{response.json()["detail"]}')

if response.status_code == 200:
	points_data = response.json()

	gridX = points_data["properties"]["gridX"]
	gridY = points_data["properties"]["gridY"]
	gridId = points_data["properties"]["gridId"]
```


