---
title: 3. Required Libraries
created: 03, Jan, 2025
modified:
  - 03, Jan, 2025
---

Most of what we're doing involves the standard libraries included with each python release, but there are a few that need to be installed.

### Built-in libraries:

And with that, we can get started with actual programming. If you haven't already, go ahead and open up VSCode and create a new `.ipynb` file. If you're not prompted to choose a Python interpreter, it'll ask you to choose one when you first execute the file. In the event you have multiple versions of Python installed, you just want to choose the one we installed in the [[1. Python|previous step]]. 

Go ahead and make a `new code cell` and add the following lines:

```py
from dataclasses import dataclass
from datetime import datetime
import math
import pytz
import time
```

### Required:

```py
import requests
```

In your terminal, type `pip requests install` to have PIP go out and fetch the `requests` package. We *could* get away without using it, but then we would have to get into the weeds of manually crafting a GET http request. This library handles a lot of the work for us, only really requiring that we pass in the correct url.

### Optional Libraries:

```py
import matplotlib.pylot as plt
import numpy as np
```

The `matplotlib` library provides a way for us to pass it data and it'll create plots for it. This is only used in the [[1. Creating a temperature plot|Optional: Creating a Temperature Plot]] section. `numpy` provides a very nice interface for dealing with arrays of data and manipulating them, we don't strictly need it for use with `matplotlib` but it tends to be the standard.

>[!note]
Both of these installations and imports can be omitted if you're skipping the optional step of creating a plot, or delayed until you get to that step.

If you are going to use them, make sure to run:

```
pip install matplotlib
```

and

```
pip install numpy
```

to get both libraries into your system. VSCode will politely complain at you if you've forgotten to do so when we run the code.